---
layout: default
title: An Article on Duels (1 of 6)
---

Since a few people have asked for these here are some of
the articles I had put together. I'll just send one installment
every few days. I think I have about 5 of these in total. At
any rate, please feel free to copy these out wherever you
like, should you be so inclined.

Benvenuto tutti. Greetings everyone!

Welcome to the first installment of a short series of articles
detailing some of the duels in Italy during the 16th Century.
I have noticed some discussion recently concerning the validity
of the "duel" when performed with armor or where multiple persons
are involved, such as in a melee. As such I've decided to provide
some documentation for anyone who might be interested in such
things as they pertain to the Duel for Honor and the Duel for
Glory. All of these examples can be found in The Sixteenth-Century
Italian Duel: A Study in Renaissance Social History by Frederick
R. Bryson, Ph. D., The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL,
1938. These accounts are related from his research into primary
and secondary source accounts of duels in Italy in the sixteenth-century.

A note about some of the terms you will find here. A Duel for Honor,
was a duel fought over some actual or perceived slight to honor, as
most of us are at least somewhat acquainted with, and is what we
typically think of as a "duel". The Duel for Glory is a duel fought
to show one's valor and courage (since honor was held to be comprised
most highly and publicly of the virtues of valor and justice). The
Duel for Glory, while fought with sharp weapons, was never a fight
to the death, unless such was accidental. Finally the duel "alla
macchia" was a duel that was informal and fought in an out of the
way spot with no judge and no rules, per se. Such duels were generally
highly frowned upon, but would often be resorted to because a ruling
noble could not be found who would grant a dueling field or because
the duel was not strictly a duel in that the parties were emotionally
involved and wanted to taste each others blood. (The Italian duel was
not supposed to be a fight with emotional involvement, but a measure
of last resort entered into rationally and justly.) Finally Dr. Frederick
Bryson also mentions that writers on the duel in the period mentioned
another type of duel that was, "as sometimes in the case of tournaments,
a formal combat between groups."

All translations from Italian in the following accounts were done
by Dr. Bryson. So let's get on with the accounts.

A duel alla macchia in Naples in 1490 as recorded in Giambattista
Giraldi's Ecatommiti (1565): "Both parties were enamored of a young
Neapolitan woman named Licina. She had fallen in love with Ercole,
but Pandonio asked him to renounce his pretensions, and also declared
that she was inconstant. Ercole thereupon gave him the lie. Since
they were near the apartments of the king, they could not fight
immediately, and moreover the king did not grant fields for duels.
So Pandonio said that early that next morning he would be outside
Naples at the place were horses were trained and that they would
fight on horseback, with no armor, and only with swords." 

"Next day at the appointed place, as soon as they saw each other,
they spurred their horses and attacked without a word. In the course
of the fight Pandonio dropped his sword, whereupon Ercole generously
drew back and invited him to dismount and recover it." (Dr. Bryson
notes here that "Such acts of generosity, which were discussed in
connection with the formal duel, were perhaps rare in a duel 'alla
macchia'.") "After Pandonio had again mounted and they had exchanged
strokes, Ercole wounded his opponent twice in the head; and he would
finally have killed him if some knights, who had heard of the contest,
had not arrived and stopped the fight. Ercole told them that he had
not sought Pandonio's life and that he was satisfied because they
had seen the victory. Pandonio wished to continue the fight, but
the knights would not consent. Thereupon the king, learning that
Licina loved Ercole, commanded that Pandonio should leave them in
peace. After Ercole had become duke of Ferrara, when Pandonio was
passing through that domain Ercole sent for him, showed him great
honor, and said that he was the bravest knight against whom he had
ever fought."

I mention the above duel because it provides negative evidence
suggesting that there would be no need to mention a duel without
armor if duels were normally fought without armor.

Next time: A duel of twelve.

Honos Servio, [Lionardo Acquistapace](mailto:zarlor@acm.org), Barony of Axemoor, Meridies

(mka Lenny Zimmermann, New Orleans, LA)

"A soldier uses arms merely with skill, whereas a knight uses them with virtuous intention."   - Pomponio Torelli, 1596.
