---
layout: default
title: An Article on Duels (4 of 6)
---

Benvenuto tutti.

This time I have a few more dueling accounts where armor was
involved. These are just a few accounts of many and, as was
mentioned last time, armor seems to have been almost a
requirement in duels earlier in the 16th Century in Italy.
While it may seem irrelevant to those of you who are more
interested in other countries and later time periods, it
should be kept in mind that Italy was pretty much the birthplace
of the Duel for Honor and the Renaissance ideals concerning
the Honor that was being fought for in such duels. Italians
wrote profusely on the philosophy of Honor and were considered
by many in other countries to be the definitive resource on
the subject and the Italian ideals were often imitated and
reiterated throughout Europe.

But enough of my rambling, let's get on with the duels.
These accounts are all by Seigneur de Brantome (Pierre
de Bourdeille) (d. 1614) in his *uvres completes, Vol.
IV published posthumously in Paris in 1873, as translated
and related by Frederick R. Bryson, Ph. D in "The
Sixteenth-Century Italian Duel: A Study in Renaissance
Social History", The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1938.

A duel in Ferrara was witnessed by Duchess Lucrezia Borgia
early in the 16th century (sometime between 1505 and 1512,
to be as exact as possible) between two captains, Azevado
and Sainte-Croix. It was fought in the courtyard of the
ducal palace and permission for the duel was granted by
Gaston de Foix, duke of Nemours (d.1512) acting as a
representative for the King of France. Duke de Foix
judged this battle and the famous knight Bayard, whom
you may remember from our last installment, was a marshal
for this duel. Azevado came to the field fully armed, since
he was the challenger and did not know what weapons to expect.
However, Sainte-Croix had brought to Azevado two swords, two
daggers and two helmets from which to choose. There was to
be no other armor used in the duel. 

Both gentlemen knelt to pray and when this was done their
seconds searched them for any magic charms or hidden weapons.
When these left the combatants to the field, the herald "made
the accustomed proclamation prohibiting them (the spectators)
from coughing, spitting, or otherwise acting in such a way as
might attract the attention of the combatants."

Sainte-Croix elected to ditch his dagger for this bout, but
Azevado kept both his sword and dagger. During the battle
Sainte-Croix received a blow to the thigh which cut to the
bone and he sank to the ground because he was so weak from
blood loss. Azevado asked him to surrender, but Sainte-Croix
sat up and made no reply. Azevado refused to strike a man who
was helpless so he bade Sainte-Croix to rise. His opponent
did so and took only two steps forward before falling down
face first. Azevado again waited for a yield as he poised
his sword to cut off his opponent's head. Duchess Lucrezia
stepped in and begged the judge, De Foix, to stop the
combat. De Foix, however, stated that despite his respect
of the Duchess, he could not break the laws of the duel
by doing so. The words of surrender were offered, however,
by Sainte-Croix's second.

Azevado was then escorted to De Foix's lodging to the sound
of trumpets and he was shown great honor. Sainte-Croix,
however, was able to take away with him his arms, as Azevado
had not done so, as was his right. When Azevado sent for them,
however, Sainte-Croix refused to give them up. The judge
notified Sainte-Croix that if he did refuse to return the
arms to Azevado that De Foix himself would ensure that he
would have to return to the field, have the stitches from
his wound removed and that the fight would continue with
Sainte-Croix in the same condition in which the fight had
ended. Suffice to say that Sainte-Croix decided to surrender
his arms after a threat from the judge like that.

Another duel was fought in Rome in 1559 with sword and dagger
and morion and armpieces.  The opponents had previously been
good friends but had come to odds. When one of them had been
stabbed in the thigh and lost his dagger, the other proclaimed
that he would not treat his opponent as an enemy, but as his
old comrade-in-arms. The seconds agreed to stop the fight and
the men again became good friends.

Another interesting duel occurred in Rome shortly thereafter
between two Corsican soldiers. They fought with sword and
wore armor consisting of a chainmail vest and a morion, which
had affixed to the front of it a short dagger. The reason
for the dagger is that the challenged, having choice of weapons,
was the weaker man and felt the dagger would help to prevent
grappling. Unfortunately, it didn't do him any good as his
opponent grabbed him and threw him to the ground, even though
this broke his opponents arm. The daggers on the helms were
quickly brought into play as both men inflicted severe wounds
on each others face, neck and arms. The seconds decided to
stop the fight and a draw was declared. The men reconciled
their differences and became friends, but one of the men
eventually died from the wounds he received, only a month
later, leaving the survivor much grieved.

Next time: A look at some group duels.

Honos Servio,

[Lionardo Acquistapace](zarlor@acm.org), Barony of Axemoor, Meridies

(mka Lenny Zimmermann, New Orleans, LA)

"A soldier uses arms merely with skill, whereas a knight uses them with virtuous intention."   - Pomponio Torelli, 1596.
