---
layout: default
title: An Article on Duels (5 of 6)
---

Benvenuto tutti.

Let's take a look at the group duel, this time around. There
are often discussions of the use of melee on a rapier field
and this can provide us with some documentation for the
practice in period. These are not tournament styles, of
course, but we can at least see that melee existed in the
16th century as a combat form in a way that was different
than the field of war, and one in which it would be more
likely to find a sword such as the rapier and where unarmored
combatants might be found. Again these accounts are mainly
related in "The Sixteenth-Century Italian Duel: A Study in
Renaissance Social History" by Frederick R. Bryson, Ph. D.,
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1938 from
period accounts.

In February 1503 a duel near Barletta was fought between
thirteen French Knights and thirteen Italian ones for patriotic
reasons, as related by Fabio Albergati in his "Tratto*.del
modo di ridurre a pace l'inimicitie private" written in
1583. Barletta, a town in the possession of the Spaniards,
was besieged by the French. The Spanish army had a great many
Italians among their ranks led by Prospero Colonna. During a
skirmish a French captain by the name of La Motte was captured
by Diego Mendoza and led into the town. During dinner with him
and other French captors, La Motte proclaimed that the Italians
were cowards and breakers of their word and that he and other
Frenchmen were ready to maintain that statement by means of
arms. Once this statement was reported to Colonna and his
soldiers, two knights, Gianni Capoccio and Gianni Bracalone,
where sent to proffer a retraction from La Motte. He
refused to retract and they proclaimed a challenge to as many
Frenchmen as would be willing, to duel with an equal number of
Italians. La Motte eventually gave his permission, despite his
initial opposition to the challenge.

The duel was fought between thirteen French knights under La
Motte and thirteen Italian knights under Ettore Fieramosca on
a field near Quarato, halfway between Barletta and the French
camp. Prospero Colonna and the famous knight Bayard judged the
duel which was fought according to all the requirements of the
code of knighthood. The French made the first attack and, after
six hours, fell into disarray as some of them were unhorsed
and captured and others were driven off of the field. La Motte
was among the defeated, having been unhorsed by Fieramosca.
The Italians only had two of their number forced out of bounds.
Thus the victory went to the Italians who returned, with the
French prisoners, to Barletta to the salute of artillery and
the ringing of bells. Gonzalo de Cordoba, the commander of the
Spanish army, gave hereditary decorations of nobility to each
of the victors and Fieramosca's family fiefs were confirmed and
he was further created as the Count of Miglionico and Lord of
Aquara. A monument was erected on the site of the duel and the
prisoners were freed after the receipt of a ransom of one
hundred gold ducats.

In 1509 outside the walls of Padua a duel was fought between
three Spanish footsoldiers and three Venetian soldiers as was
related by Fabio Albergati, above, and Paolo Giovio's "Historie"
Vol. I, Book XII published in 1551. The Spanish troops of
Maximilan I were besieging the Venetian city when three Spanish
footsoldiers offered a duel with an equal number of Italians.
Liviano, who commanded the Venetians, selected three from the
many who wished to accept the challenge and who went out of
the city to kill one of the Spaniards and wound and capture
the other two.

On March 12, 1529 a duel was fought between four men, two to a
side, outside the walls of Florence (Lodovico Martelli and
Dante da Castiglione against Giovanni Bandini and Albertino
Aldobrandi or Aldobardi). This is related to us chiefly by
Paolo Giovio, but Brantome also collaborates the story using
different, but similar, names. The duel was said to have
started over a jealousy regarding a lady. Again we have a city
under siege, this time by troops of the Emperor Charles V
under the command of the Prince of Orange. Due to the nature
of politics in Florence, some of the supporters of the Medici
family were in the army of the Emperor. As such a soldier in
the city, Lodovico Martelli sent a "cartello", a publicly
written challenge to a duel, to one of these supporters by
the name of Giovanni Bandini. The challenge was accepted and
it was further suggested by Bandini that they fight the duel
with a companion, listing his own as Albertino Aldobrandi (or
"Aldobardi"). Martelli selected Dante da Castiglione and the
Prince of Orange granted them a field and safe-conduct. 

The field was enclosed by ropes and guarded by infantrymen
taken in equal numbers of Italians, Spaniards and Germans.
They fought with sword and for armor they wore only an iron
gauntlet on the right hand. Castiglione, who happened by
chance to fight Aldobrandi, received a severe wound in the
first pass but happened to grasp his sword with both hands
and struck a fatal blow to Aldobrandi's mouth. Aldobrandi's
companion, Bandini, wounded Martelli in the forehead and
followed with a thrust to the ribs, which made him surrender,
a wound from which he would die after being carried into the
city. Many proclaimed that he died not so much from his
wounds, but from grief over his defeat. Equal honor was
accorded to each of the victors. 

I would like to note that Brantome's account of this duel
adds two notable features. First, according to custom,
Castiglione was not allowed to assist his companion,
despite having bested his opponent early on. (Perhaps a
further consideration that such melee duels were merely
numerous individuals fighting single fights.)  Second,
upon his being mortally wounded, Martelli insisted upon
surrendering only to Bandini's commander, but soon gave
in to surrender to Bandini himself. It was thought,
however, that such a surrender could not occur without
the consent of the winner.

Next time: Some final thoughts.

Honos Servio,

[Lionardo Acquistapace](mailto:zarlor@acm.org), Barony of Axemoor, Meridies
(mka Lenny Zimmermann, New Orleans, LA)

"A soldier uses arms merely with skill, whereas a knight uses them with virtuous intention."   - Pomponio Torelli, 1596.
