---
layout: default
title: An Article on Duels (6 of 6)
---

Benvenutto tutti.

The articles presented here recently have been a means of
showing how armor and melees have existed in some forms in
Italy in the 16th Century. While I have found this information
to be fascinating to read about and research many other
questions have come to mind from this. In particular is how
is any of this truly related to what we do on the SCA Rapier
tournament field?  As it stands now, any evidence we seem to
have regarding the use of rapiers in any kind of tournament
similar to the tournaments we perform in the SCA is
exceptionally sketchy, at best. An argument could be made,
and has been made, especially by those who would censure this
combat style, that there is no historical counterpart for
what we do. Even assuming there was such a counterpart, what
would it have been like?

I think what we may want to consider is how can we take what
we DO know about combat forms in period and integrate them
into what we do on the field. What better way to teach ourselves
and others about the historical aspects of the European martial
arts of our studied time periods? Attempting to integrate that
knowledge can also assist us, I believe, in creating more of
the atmosphere of an historical event. 

So how do we integrate what we do know? Obviously what we do is
not real dueling, but dueling forms were certainly known to have
been performed without, as well as with, armor. We can certainly
take some of what we know about dueling mindset and views of
honor and chivalry and dueling forms and integrate those onto
the field. For some, dueling IS what we are recreating on the
field and for those individuals drawing heavily from the corpus
on dueling would be an excellent manner for assisting in
recreation of what occurs on our tournament fields. 

We also have information on what tournaments were like in our
periods.  Although tournaments were most often performed with
the use of armor, and most of our rules state we are wearing no
armor for blow calling purposes, this should not prevent us
from looking to the tournament for ideas and views. After all,
the tournament gives us a look at period viewpoints on sporting
events, particularly combat related sporting events. As such the
tournament is a rich environment to draw from for what we are
doing on our combat fields, which is, mainly, just a different
style of tournament. Why not look to the tournament for use of
armor, or for ideas for tourney styles? After all while our rules
often state we wear no armor that is simply a rule to justify
how to call blows. Armor in period, as now, is mainly a piece
of equipment meant to ensure a level of safety for the participant.
So we can still take much from the tournament field, for those
interested in recreating something of a tournament feel and
learning about period tournaments, without going to the armoring
and health requirements needed for our armored, or "heavy", combat
forms. I would argue that period tournaments have great validity
for use in our tournament recreations. Some may even wish to
assume that the sword they have in their hand is not a rapier,
but any number of swords available to them.

We also know that the schools of 'fence in our studied time
periods sparred. What safety equipment did they use and can
we recreate it with modifications for our rules and requirements?
Did they spar with other schools or within the schools and what
formats did they use for such events? Did they ever perform
demonstrations for the local nobles (although we know the
London Masters of Defence did so on occasion)?  Are the London
Masters of Defence the only group we have information on to
perform displays of fighting prowess? What equipment and rules
did they use for safety? Is there any other construct more
fitting for the nobility? The London Masters were, after all,
a fairly middle class construct, but not all of our personas
are middle class or as interested in recreating such things.

We know that the sport of fencing seems to have existed,
but what are the rules? What equipment did they use? We
have to look at other sports to assist us in determining
these things, but if anyone has any sources I know we all
would love to see them. We already know something about the
fighting styles that SOME of the teachers of combat forms
were teaching and those styles can be used in our recreations
as well. Notice that although those texts discuss learning
the art of 'fence, they also often discuss concepts of honor
and chivalry that can be brought to the field. How did they
use those concepts in their schools? Did they try to teach
them or instill those ideals into their students during
practices and sparring sessions? And if so, in what ways?

None of us tend to recreate the exact same way. We all take
information from all of the above sources, traditions of
the SCA, mindset from our modern viewpoints, Victorian
ideals and those ideals of the periods we all study. I do
not see that any particular combination of the above formats
is inherently "better" than any other. Many of us will even
change the mixture of the above sources we use depending on
what we are attempting to recreate, learn and teach at any
particular time.

Sometimes you may wish to view what we are doing on the
field as a completely unarmored duel. While you may haver
taught yourself to ignore the blatantly modern construct
of a fencing mask for this purpose, a period helm will simply
seem to intrude on how you are trying to view things. At
other times, the opposite may be true and the helm is
perfectly natural as a period form of safety equipment,
but you may not be able to get around that disgustingly
modern mask so easily. It is up to each of us to recreate
and learn and teach as best we can with the resources we
have available and accept that our recreations will not
always blend perfectly with the recreations of others. I
think it is admirable to simply learn what others are
teaching us and teach what we can as best as we can. And
please, share your knowledge with us!

Honos Servio,

[Lionardo Acquistapace]("zarlor-at-acm.org"), Barony of Axemoor, Meridies

(mka Lenny Zimmermann, New Orleans, LA)

"A soldier uses arms merely with skill, whereas a knight uses them with virtuous intention."   - Pomponio Torelli, 1596.
